# ST113 Doctrine of God Digest 1

## Bavinck

### Chapter 1 (CUT IN HALF)

All dogmatics is about God, who cannot be fully grasped in a scientific sense, and must move us to worship. Though it may seem otherwise, Scripture makes clear that God is knowable and known by all in some sense. God is revealed in many ways in Scripture, and is "not confined to the world but exalted above it" (30). This is contested by many who would say that originally Israel worshiped stone, fire, or thunder gods, but Scripture shows clear consciousness of God residing in heaven, not in any one geographic spot.

The OT mentions many gods and appears to acknowledge their existence, but on closer inspection it consistently affirms YHWH as the one and only true God and presenting a consistent doctrine of God. In pagan worldviews, "the unity of the personality and absoluteness of God is broken" (34). Either God ends up generic and not a person, or he is claimed to be undescribable, or perhaps only in the negative.

God is incomprehensible - never exhaustively revealed. Only God can fully know God. What this means has evolved over time. For Augustine, describing God starts with "being", and everything else is essentially saying what God is not. Nothing positive could be said to describe God's essence. Early scholastics affirmed this, but eventually God became highly defined and incomprehensibility functionally disappeared. Eventually both the Reformers and the Roman Catholic church settled on a doctrine of incomprehensibility, but then in various circles in diminished in favor of a focus on knowing God's will.

Philosophers picked up this idea of God as incomprehensible, as Kant considered God to be transcendental - not objectively provable but subjectively assumed. Schleiermacher continued with the idea of an unknowable God. Feuerbach considered God to just be derived from humanity, but moderating this atheism a form of agnosticism rose as speculation was avoided and concrete facts and exact sciences won the day. Theology became the science of religion instead of the study of God. Agnostics challenged the knowability of God by arguing that our faculties of knowledge are insufficient to have any knowledge of the transcendent and that a personal God is not only impossible but unnecessary. A strong contradiction was asserted between a personal and an absolute God, and if God was absolute then he could not be knowable or personal.

Christians much affirm much of the unknowability of God, insofar as God is utterly holy and absolute and infinite. But would say that while we cannot know God comprehensively, we can know some things about him. We know analogically - truly, yet not comprehensively. What agnostics consider contradictory, Christians consider a mystery - how God is able to reveal himself in time and space in a way that can be apprehended. It would be functionally impossible to insist on only speaking of God based on negation - there would be nothing left to be said.

The only way to have knowledge of God, then is for God to reveal himself. Agnosticism, though, ends in atheism, asserting that we don't know if God exists and that he cannot reveal himself. It refuses to admit that, though, and ends up in the untenable position of describing God by saying that he is indescribable. Merely by observing what God is not, we observe what God is (e.g. by saying God is incomprehensible, we are saying a lot, and Eunomius says that knowledge of God consists in the perception of this (51)).

### Chapter 2

Though we cannot know comprehensively, God has revealed himself in scripture and creation to give us some knowledge of himself. Many try to deny him, but this atheism is untenable and rarely exists in an absolute form. Atheism and materialism tend to devolve into functional pantheism. Relatively, an "atheist" may deny a particular god (or God), but instead worships another.

Many in philosophy developed the idea that certain ideas are innate, not acquired, starting with the Greeks and leading all the way up to Kant's concept of innate forms. Others such as Locke and Hobbes rejected this, as there seem to be no ideas that are innate to all men. To them, "all knowledge stems from sense perception" (62). Evolution provides for a mediating idea - men did not originally have innate knowledge but have evolved to that point. The Christian Scholastics rejected the theory of innate ideas, based on misreadings of the Fathers. Because they rejected natural theology, Luther and his followers were disposed against innate ideas, but their stance softened over time. Calvin and the Reformed theologians did not reject natural theology so strongly, and strongly asserted that all humans have an inherent awareness of divinity. "The conviction that there is a God is 'naturally inborn.' It can never be eradicated." (67) Christians must reject innate ideas because it removes the necessity of revelation through scripture and nature and gives man a path to full understanding through introspection. The fact that there is no single ethical truth recognized everywhere casts further doubt on the theory.

Humans are, however, innately disposed to certain things, like counting and numbers, the difference between good and evil, and the knowledge of God. We possess capacity and inclination toward the knowledge of God, though it arises mediately through revelation. We have the necessary principles and necessary data to have the knowledge of God. We must make a distinction, though, between innate and acquired knowledge of God. Neither means that a person is born with it; innate knowledge arises spontaneously and consists in principles, while acquired knowledge is reasoned and learned through argument and detailed and concrete and precise. Special revelation is necessary for both - nature is insufficient on its own, but scripture is used as a lens through which we see God in nature. Scripture assumes that God exists and doesn't seek to provide and argument for his existence but a witness to it. Nevertheless, we can see the beginnings of the proofs in scripture.

The proofs for God's existence can be over- or under-stated. They are often dangerously considered sufficient to give a knowledge of God, arguing that reasoning is all that's necessary to know God. Oppositely, they can be disregarded and rejected as wrong or useless. The cosmological argument holds that an effect must have a cause, and if an infinite chain of causes is not acceptable, then the universe must have a First Cause. It does not, however, tell us much about that Cause - whether it is personal, holy, reasonable, etc. The teliological argument holds that order and beauty and observable purpose must have an intelligent cause. This is objected to by materialists and pantheists, but their objections can be overcome to show that we must have at least a multiplicity of intelligent world-shapers. The ontological argument holds wrongly that if everyone thinks about God, he must exist. This just shows that everyone thinks about God, and has value as a cosmological argument, but not ontological. The moral argument holds that moral phenomenon require a moral cause, though it is less a proof than a confirmation that all men have a moral consciousness. The argument from universal consent holds that since all peoples at all times have had a religion, that it must be part of human nature, not learned. Objectors say that we will eventually get over it. The historical-theological argument holds that there seems to be a guiding purpose to the development of history; evolution has replaced God in this role in the minds of many. These proofs are not meant to be syllogistic logical grounds for faith or the existence of God, but are products of faith, testimonies to the believer and unbeliever, and reveal much about the character and attributes of God.

### Chapter 3

A name is a distinguishing mark, revealing the identity of a person or thing. Scripture treats names as important and often gives their meaning. God names himself; his name is part of his revelation to us. It describes God not how he is but how he is revealed to us. It puts us in relationship to him, and we are to call upon him in that name. Throughout Scripture, God communicates through anthropomorphism, writing in human language, being described by human attributes, having human emotions, taking human actions, and holding human offices and positions. All creation exists to give glory to God, and all things are named to be named in reference to God.

It is legitimate to name God, and not a violation of his incomprehensibility, because he has revealed himself in the world and with names, named himself, and without names we are left to negativism and agnosticism. We have limited knowledge, but we can know truly, though we know through our sense perception. If this type of knowledge were not valid, we could not know anything, think, or speak. God has archetypal knowledge, but we have ectypal knowledge of God - "reasoned reason" given as revelation, flowing from us being known by God and created in his image.

Scripture never emphasizes one attribute of God at the expense of another but presents a harmony. Nor does it present an abstract God, but one that is always described with attributes. It is impossible to speak of such an abstract God meaningfully - his attributes are by definition part of who he is. Eventually theologians sought to find an attribute that more fundamentally described who God was, and settled on "being", based on the name YHWH. Some argued for infinity and God's will as core attributes, but the Reformers went with "being" or "aseity" as well, following Augustine and Thomas. Ritschl emphasized God's love, and Reischle emphasized the kingdom of God. Ultimately, though, the difficult task remains of "honoring equally all the attributes of God." (118)

God is "simple" - his essence and attributes are identical and cannot be seperated. Labeling God as the "Personal Absolute Being" is confusing. "Personal" collides with the persons of the Trinity. "Absolute" can have a philosophically abstract sense. Instead, God's primary attribute is his aseity. "He is the fullness of being" (124) and has all perfections and graces added to him. Though his essence and attributes cannot be separated, his attributes are distinct from one another and tell us different things about him. They are revealed by God to us to communicate to us about his essence. We arrive at these attributes by either 2 or 3 ways: apophatic and kataphatic, or negation, eminence, and causality, which essentially say the same thing. There have been many different ways to divide up the attributes, but none of them are any good - all attributes end up being communicable and incommunicable; positive and negative. But to present things in an ordered way, it is best to divide into 3 groups: proper names of God, God as the Trinity, and then other attributes. Those attributes, for the sake of presentation, can be arranged into incommunicable and communicable categories.

God in himself has no proper name, but we must use them to refer to him. "El" refers to the object of desire, or the prominent one. "Elohim" is the Strong One, the object of dread, a relative term refering to absolute transcendence and prominence over his creatures. "El Shaddai" is the All-Sufficient One who bountifully supplies all things. "Yahweh" is thought of as the personal name of God and highlights his faithfulness and his unchangeability. "Yahweh Sabaoth" is the Lord of Hosts - Lord of the glory of the angel armies. These names all have New Testament equivalents, and have had "Father" added to them, reflecting the family relationship of God to his people in Christ.


## Turretin starting with Question 6

Is the distinction of attributes into communicable and incommunicable a good one? Yes - though the properties of God are all equal, equally incommunicable, and equally essential to God. Incommunicable attributes are negative attributes. Communicable attributes are positive attributes derived by way of eminence or causality, and exist in man analogically.

Is God most simple and free from all composition? Yes - this has always been taught by the church, including by Augustine and Athanasius. God is absolutely, physically, free from composition and division. Composition would imply imperfection - as if something needed to be added. There is no one who could have composed God - he composes other things. He cannot be composed with anything created, because he is immutable. When Christ became man, there was hypostatic union, not composition. The attributes of God are identical with his essence - not composed into it - and instead demonstrate distinction.

Is God infinite in essence? Yes - only God is actually and absolutely infinite. Scripture teaches it when it says in Psalm 145:3, "Of his greatness there is no end." If God is perfect, then he couldn't lack infinity, as we can concieve that he would be more perfect if he was infinite; therefore, he must be infinite. Scripture also teaches that God has infinite power, which is part of his essence, therefore he must be infinite. Otherwise, he would be limited somehow and there would be something he could not do. God is able to know himself fully not because he is finite but because both his being and his knowledge is infinite.

Is God immense and omnipresent as to essence? Yes - God is omnipresent as to power, knowledge, and essence. Some, however, would have him not be omnipresent as to essence but contained in heaven. This does not follow. Scripture states that God fills heaven and earth. It is not possible to hide from or escape God. Some would say that this just means that power and knowledge are everywhere, but God's power and knowledge act by his essence and even are his essence, thus this is an indication that his essence really is everywhere. If he weren't, we would say that the universe is in more places essentially than God is, which would not hold. God is in especially in heaven in a majestic sense, but everywhere in an essential sense. Being in filthy places does not contaminate him because he is not mixing with them. He is not everywhere insofar as matter might fill a space, but more that he contains "the whole world in the most simple infinity of his own essence" (201).

Does the eternity of God exclude succession according to priority and posteriority? Yes - all agree that God is without beginning or end, but some disagree that God is without succession. Scripture and logic show that God is "free from any difference in time" (202). Scripture shows that God never changes and is always the same - succession of time necessitate motion and change. Also, if there is no beginning there can be no succession, because succession requires a beginning - a first moment. Instead, eternity "ought to be conceived as a standing, but not a flowing, now." God embraces all time at once; nothing is ever "past" or "future" to God.

Is God immutable both in essence and will? Yes - scripture maintains explicitly that God never changes. "I am the Lord, I change not." (Mal 3:6). Created things are mutable, but God is uncreated and thus not mutable. Neither does he have any cause of change within him. God did not change by creation or incarnation, nor does he change when scripture says he "repents" - that is just an analogical way of describing the external working of God's secret will. Likewise unfulfilled threatenings have an implicit condition.

Do all things fall under the knowledge of God, both singulars and future contingencies? Yes - Scripture plainly states that God knows all things. Some try to argue that God does not know "singulars" - specific details about his creation. This is demonstrably false from Scripture, as he knows sand and hairs and names the stars. These same people try to argue that God does not know future contingencies. This is also demonstrably false, as God knows all things from eternity, thus he knows future contingencies. He even predicts them by prophets to display his foreknowledge. Moreover, knowledge of the future is a perfection; thus God must have knowledge of the future. Last, God knows all things because in his providence he executes all things according to his divine decrees.
